Development of an Application for AI-Enhanced Game-Based Learning: An Analytical Literature Review
Executive Summary
Recent literature on gamification and game-based learning consistently reports increases in learner motivation and engagement when game mechanics such as points, leaderboards, badges, and immediate feedback are used. However, the effect on measurable learning outcomes varies and depends on the educational context, the intervention design, and its duration. Critical reviews emphasize that the empirical base on long-term effects remains heterogeneous and methodologically limited; as a result, "surface-level" gamification may generate short-term enthusiasm without producing sustained gains in competence. [1]
Meta-analyses and systematic reviews further clarify the profile of these effects. One large meta-analysis on learning outcomes found a strong average effect, but with major moderators including user type, subject area, design principles, duration, and learning environment. [2] A meta-analysis focused on intrinsic motivation found a statistically significant but small overall effect, together with stronger effects on autonomy and relatedness and only minimal influence on competence. [3] Regarding academic performance, a meta-analysis of 22 experimental studies from 2008 to 2023 reported a moderately positive effect of gamification (Hedges's g approximately 0.782). [4]
Shifting to the thesis topic of AI-enhanced game-based learning means moving beyond gamification as a simple interface layer toward a model centered on data and adaptivity. AI-enhanced systems use interaction traces and telemetry to personalize learning paths and content, yet a systematic mapping study shows that the number of genuinely implemented AI-adaptive systems remains relatively small compared with the size of the research field. The literature therefore calls for more design-oriented studies that meaningfully connect algorithms, user experience, and pedagogical goals. [5] In AI-enhanced educational games specifically, a systematic review of adaptive game-based learning highlights the benefits of using performance and engagement data during the intervention, while also noting that adaptation is often limited to a finite set of pre-authored content, which narrows the scope of personalization. [6]
For the proposed diploma application, the most promising architecture is one that integrates five core layers: (1) a practice engine and game modes, (2) event collection and teacher analytics dashboards, (3) an AI adaptation module based on learner profile, progress, and recommendations, (4) built-in stealth assessment based on gameplay traces, and (5) ethics, safety, and privacy safeguards. In the area of stealth assessment, deep learning models have been shown to reduce the burden of manual feature engineering and to improve the accuracy and timeliness of competence prediction, although model interpretability remains a key concern. [7] From the perspective of UX, the literature also points to a shortage of strong user-centered approaches in the design of digital educational games and proposes structured frameworks for co-design and iterative user research. [8] Finally, international guidance on generative AI in education stresses the risks created by regulatory gaps, threats to data privacy, and the need for a human-centered and age-appropriate approach to ethical validation and pedagogical design. [9]
Introduction and Scope of the Review
This review builds on a previously prepared analysis of an interactive educational platform with gamified modes for teachers and students, where the effects of gamification, novelty-related risks, differences between platform modes, and architectural requirements were systematized. Within the present thesis, the focus is narrowed and specified: the object of study is an application for AI-enhanced game-based learning, in which gamification is not an end in itself but rather an interface and behavioral layer that supports (a) personalization, (b) adaptive practice, (c) embedded assessment, and (d) analytics for pedagogical decision-making.
In this review, gamification is understood as the integration of game elements into an educational context in order to enhance engagement. A critical review highlights the continuing growth of interest in this approach alongside still-mixed evidence regarding durable learning effects. [10] At least one empirical line of research shows that even the simplest elements, such as points, can alter learner behavior during testing by changing response speed and subjective appeal, although they do not necessarily improve accuracy. [11]
Within the present review, AI enhancement refers to the use of learning-data analysis algorithms, ranging from statistical modeling to machine learning, for four purposes: (1) adapting content, difficulty, and hints; (2) predicting progress and identifying learning difficulties; (3) automating and enriching assessment, including stealth assessment; and (4) supporting teacher decisions through dashboards and explanations. This approach belongs to the broader class of AI-adaptive learning systems that deliver content while adapting to individual learner needs. At the same time, the systematic mapping study indicates that implemented solutions remain relatively limited compared with the scale of the research field. [5]
The review is delimited to five interconnected areas: (a) empirical effects of gamification and game-based platforms, especially popular quiz platforms; (b) design frameworks and factors influencing effectiveness; (c) AI-based adaptivity and personalization in game-based learning; (d) assessment, analytics, and user-experience approaches; and (e) ethics and privacy. Priority is given to primary and/or official sources from the list of 20 works used in this review, including 15 original sources and 5 additional open-access sources. [12]
Gamification and Game Pedagogy Design: Theories and Design Frameworks
A practice-oriented strand of the literature treats gamification as the design of activity and feedback loops in which game mechanics must be tied to learning objectives rather than functioning as decorative interface features. The well-known five-step design approach - goals and constraints, learner profiling, activity and feedback loops, selection of mechanics, and data-driven iteration - provides an engineering logic for development that is close to product design. [13] Conceptual work on the gamification of educational computer games offers a framework that links gamification principles, system design elements, and engagement measures, thereby supplying a useful vocabulary for design and evaluation. [14]
Critical reviews of empirical studies emphasize that, despite an overall trend toward increased motivation and engagement, significant uncertainties remain: long-term comparative studies are scarce, results vary substantially, and practical enthusiasm often runs ahead of understanding of the underlying mechanisms. [15] This leads to an important methodological implication for the thesis: the application should support measurability and verifiability. In other words, it should include not only game elements but also data collection, comparison mechanisms such as A/B testing or quasi-experiments, transparent reward rules, and a clear alignment between game actions and educational goals.
Another major design issue concerns assessment. Experiments on the use of points in computer-based testing show that gamified incentives can increase response speed and may initially make the test feel more attractive, but they do not necessarily improve accuracy and their effect can change across sessions, which signals a possible novelty effect. [11] For design, this means that reward mechanics in an educational game should be aligned with indicators of mastery rather than only with activity frequency or speed; otherwise, motivation may shift toward "faster" or "more" rather than toward "more accurate" or "deeper" learning. [11]
The Effects of Gamification on Motivation and Learning Outcomes: A Synthesis of Empirical Evidence
The overall empirical evidence supports the claim that gamification has positive effects, but only under important conditions. A meta-analysis of learning outcomes covering 41 studies, 49 independent samples, and more than 5,071 participants found a strong overall effect size, while also showing that results are significantly moderated by intervention characteristics such as the duration of the gameful experience, the learning environment, design principles, and user type. [2] This creates a direct requirement for the diploma product: the application should be configurable so that the same core engine can support pedagogically different scenarios, such as intensive drill practice, gap diagnosis, or a full mission-based learning experience with narrative elements. [2]
If the focus is narrowed specifically to intrinsic motivation, the picture becomes more cautious. A meta-analysis of 35 interventions with about 2,500 participants found a small overall effect on intrinsic motivation, together with stronger effects on autonomy and relatedness and only minimal influence on competence. [3] For AI-enhanced game-based learning, this point is crucial: AI-based personalization should not merely make the experience entertaining, but should actively support learners' subjective sense of competence through adaptive challenge levels, diagnostic feedback, and visible progress markers. Otherwise, motivational gains may not translate into genuine mastery. [16]
Regarding academic achievement, a meta-analysis of experimental studies from 2008 to 2023 reported a moderately positive effect (Hedges's g approximately 0.782) and stressed the importance of moderators when selecting game elements for different educational levels and contexts. [4] In other words, gamification works on average, but it does not guarantee effectiveness in every specific course or learner group. This again strengthens the need for data-driven iteration and context-sensitive design adaptation in the proposed application. [17]
The limits and risks of gamification are also confirmed by longitudinal evidence. A study examining how gamification effects change over time analyzed behavioral outcomes across a semester and discussed novelty effects, long-duration intervention challenges, and the importance of comparison with a non-gamified control group. [18] In addition, experimental evidence on personality traits shows that the same mechanics, such as points, badges, and rankings, may work differently for different learners. [19] For the diploma application, this implies that personalization should operate not only at the content level - what the learner practices - but also at the motivational and UX level, including how progress is displayed, which forms of social comparison are appropriate, and how public leaderboards should be. [20]
Platform Modes and Functional Patterns: Kahoot! and Quizizz as Baseline References
Empirical studies of popular quiz-based platforms show that even relatively simple game formats, such as quizzes with rapid feedback, can be associated with positive perceptions and/or improvements in selected cognitive and educational indicators when the intervention is sufficiently long and properly integrated into the learning process. Experimental work comparing groups exposed to a quiz platform for different lengths of time found improvements in attention, critical thinking, and related skills, while also highlighting the importance of dosage and balance with other activities. [21]
Research on students' perceptions of a quiz-based tool in higher education reports increased interest in class and stronger motivation, while also stressing that the design of in-course competition and the specific format of implementation influence the outcome. [22] Similarly, a study on another quiz platform in higher education using a mixed-methods design (survey plus focus groups) found increases in engagement, autonomy, and self-regulation, while also noting that this platform remains comparatively under-researched relative to more widely discussed competitors. [23]
Studies in language learning, particularly reading, show that the use of several gamified tools, including different platforms, can support reading practice and engagement, although the authors emphasize the need for additional research on best implementation practices and long-term effects. [24] This is important for the thesis because the application should support several modes, for example a synchronous classroom battle and an asynchronous self-practice mode, while also providing teacher tools for matching each mode to a particular goal such as diagnosis, consolidation, revision, or preparation for formal assessment.
Within these platform patterns, the relationship between individual elements and motivation is especially informative. One study on quiz-application components found statistically significant links between particular mechanics - such as points, difficulty level, and avatars - and extrinsic motivation, while also reporting the proportion of explained variance in motivational outcomes. [25] This supports an engineering conclusion: the mechanics in the diploma application should be designed as configurable parameters rather than as a rigid, fixed "game shell." [26]
AI-Enhanced Game-Based Learning: Adaptivity, Personalization, and Stealth Assessment
Moving from gamified practice to an AI-enhanced educational game requires a strong foundation in research on adaptive game-based learning. A systematic review of adaptive game-based learning shows that tailoring content and/or learning experience to the learner is usually associated with better retention and a more meaningful experience. It also demonstrates the diversity of adaptive approaches: adaptation may affect the selection and presentation of content, the quantity and type of exercises or levels, or the difficulty adjustment based on performance and engagement data. [27] At the same time, the review notes a common limitation: in many cases, adaptivity is implemented as a choice among a finite set of pre-authored content packages, which restricts the depth of personalization and often requires grouping learners by metrics. [6]
At the broader level of AI-adaptive systems, a systematic mapping study of 147 publications from 2014 to 2020 underscores the central idea of data-driven personalization while also observing that genuinely implemented systems are still relatively few. It therefore formulates the need for more precise matching between the type of AI intervention and the specific educational problem being addressed - in effect, design-to-problem matching. [5] For the thesis, this means that AI should be operationalized through clearly defined application functions and testable hypotheses: (1) adaptive difficulty to keep learners in an optimal challenge zone, (2) recommendation of tasks or missions based on mistakes and solution time, (3) personalized feedback, and (4) prediction of learner drop-off risk together with corresponding teacher support signals. [28]
A key component of AI-enhanced game-based learning is in-game assessment, or stealth assessment, in which fine-grained interaction traces are used to infer competence. A study published in IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies describes the DEEPSTEALTH framework, which uses deep neural models to infer competence from sequences of actions and demonstrates advantages in both predictive accuracy and early detection, while also reducing the burden of manual feature engineering. [29] At the same time, the authors emphasize an important limitation: deep models require further work on interpretability and explainability, which is directly connected to trustworthiness and fairness in educational decision-making. [7]
Finally, the AI layer inevitably raises ethical and privacy issues. International guidance on generative AI in education emphasizes that the release of new tools is outpacing national regulatory frameworks and that, in many countries, the lack of clear regulation leaves users' personal data insufficiently protected. The guidance proposes policy measures including privacy protection requirements, age restrictions, and a human-centered approach to ethical validation and pedagogical design. [9] In the context of the diploma application, this becomes a set of non-functional requirements: data minimization, transparency, consent, access control, the ability to explain why the system generated a given recommendation, and procedures for monitoring risks such as bias, data leakage, or inappropriate generated content. [30]
Research Gaps, Conclusions, and Recommendations for the Application Architecture
Critical Research Gaps and Bottlenecks
First, there remains a gap between positive average effects reported in the literature and practical reproducibility. Meta-analyses highlight the strong role of moderators such as duration, environment, and design principles, while critical reviews point to methodological limitations and a lack of long-term validation. This means there is a risk that the application may be impressive in form but not genuinely effective in producing durable learning outcomes unless it includes an embedded evaluation loop and iterative refinement. [31]
Second, personalization in educational games is often limited to finite content sets. Fully developed online adaptation to individual trajectories and learner states, including both cognitive and affective dimensions, is less mature in the literature, even though it is precisely this level of adaptation that promises to sustain engagement and prevent boredom or overload. [27]
Third, AI-based embedded assessment, especially stealth assessment, appears technologically promising but still faces difficulties related to model interpretability and therefore to trust, fairness, and pedagogical usability - especially when assessments inform high-stakes decisions. [32]
Fourth, the UX dimension is frequently underestimated. The literature on digital educational games repeatedly notes the insufficiency of strong user-centered design processes and proposes dedicated frameworks that incorporate co-design and iterative user research across all phases of development and validation. [8]
Fifth, AI ethics in education is becoming a systemic constraint. International recommendations emphasize weak national regulation, privacy risks, and the need for age-appropriate and ethically validated solutions. [9]
Applied Conclusions and Recommendations for Developing the Diploma Application
The following recommendations are derived directly from the reviewed literature and can be treated as product requirements that are traceable to research and testable empirically:
1) Multimodality and configurable mechanics. Because the effects of gamification are context-dependent and moderated by intervention characteristics, the application should support multiple modes - synchronous and asynchronous, individual and team-based, practice and diagnosis - together with adjustable settings for leaderboard visibility, timers, repetition, and reward rules. [33]
2) Adaptivity as a data function rather than merely scenario branching. The AI module should be built around a formalized learner model incorporating errors, time, independence, and persistence so that it can adapt content, difficulty, and hints while reducing the risk of the task being either too easy or too difficult. The review of adaptive game-based learning stresses that the use of performance and engagement data during the intervention is a central mechanism of adaptive strategy. [34]
3) Stealth assessment and pedagogically explainable analytics. Gameplay traces and machine learning models can improve both the accuracy and the timeliness of competence diagnosis, but the diploma implementation should also include explainability: which actions acted as signals, which tasks led to the inference, and how certain the system is. The problem of interpretability is explicitly noted in the literature on deep learning-based assessment. [29]
4) Reward mechanics should be linked to mastery rather than only to speed or activity. Experiments on points in testing show behavioral shifts toward faster responding without guaranteed gains in accuracy and with effects on subjective attractiveness that may be short-lived. Therefore, the reward system in the application should control for "race" effects and support quality of performance. [35]
5) A user-centered development and UX validation process. In the case of an educational game, it is essential to involve teachers and learners in co-design, conduct iterative UX studies, and use validated tools to assess usability and usefulness. The relevant design framework offers a step-by-step methodology and reports practical validation by experts. [8]
6) Ethics, privacy, and safe AI by default. The application should include data minimization, clear policies, access control, age-sensitive modes, human-in-the-loop procedures for sensitive decisions, logging, and ongoing monitoring of quality and risk. These requirements align with international guidance on generative AI in education. [9]
The high-level component model below is proposed as a conceptual framework for thesis design and for later hypothesis validation:
flowchart TD
  A[Client application: game/interface] --> B[Game modes and rules]
  B --> C[Event collection (telemetry): actions, mistakes, time, attempts]
  C --> D[Data storage and processing pipeline]
  D --> E[Learner model: progress, gaps, risk of disengagement]
  E --> F[Adaptive engine: task selection, difficulty, hints]
  F --> B

  D --> G[Stealth assessment: competence inference from gameplay traces]
  G --> H[Teacher dashboards: diagnosis, recommendations, reports]

  I[Ethics and safety layer] --> D
  I --> F
  I --> G

Comparative Source Matrix and Reference List
The table below compares all 20 sources used in the review, including the 15 original sources and the 5 added open-access sources. Years are given according to the primary publication year; for some works, minor differences may exist between online-first and issue publication dates. [36]
No.Author(s)YearTypePurpose / contributionMethodologyKey findingsRelevance to the application1A. Aibar-Almazan et al.2024ArticleAssessment of the effects of quiz-based gamification in higher educationExperiment with three exposure groups; four months; n˜73; psychometric tests of attention, creativity, and related variablesLonger exposure was associated with improvement in several skills; dosage and balance with other activities matterSupports the inclusion of a quiz mode in the application and the need to control dosage and implementation scenario [21]2Y. Attali; M. Arieli-Attali2015ArticleExamines whether awarding points affects testing performanceSeries of computer-based testing experiments with adults and school studentsPoints increased response speed but not accuracy; test liking was higher only in the first sessionImportant for reward design: risk of acceleration without improvement in accuracy; need for mastery metrics [11]3H. Bicen; S. Kocakoyun2018ArticleStudies students' perceptions of gamification through a quiz platformMixed methods survey; n=65 studentsHigher classroom interest and motivation; the tool was viewed as useful for gamified instructionHelps define user requirements and classroom implementation scenarios; supports a low-entry design for teachers [22]4C. Dichev; D. Dicheva2017ReviewCritical synthesis of what is known and what remains uncertain in educational gamificationCritical review of empirical literatureEffects are often positive for engagement, but evidence for long-term benefits remains limited; stronger research is neededJustifies embedded evaluation and the avoidance of superficial gamification [37]5W. H.-Y. Huang; D. Soman2013Report / guidePractical framework for designing gamification in educationDesign-oriented method: goals, learner profiling, activity loops, mechanic selection, iterationGame mechanics should be tied to goals and feedback; design must be iterative and data-informedProvides a development framework for product requirements and the MVP-to-telemetry iteration cycle [13]6D. A. Kaufmann2018Reflective articleExplains the benefits of gamification in online higher educationDescriptive / reflective analysisGamification can support task completion and engagement; feedback cycles and organizational support matterUseful for thinking about long-term learning trajectories and mechanisms that sustain practice [38]7Liuyufeng Li; K. F. Hew; J. Du2024Meta-analysis and systematic reviewAssesses the effect of gamification on intrinsic motivation and basic needs satisfactionMeta-analysis of 35 interventions (˜2500 participants) plus systematic reviewSmall overall effect on intrinsic motivation; stronger effects on autonomy and relatedness; minimal effect on competenceShows the need to design AI feedback so that it strengthens competence and autonomy, not only enjoyment [3]8Minzi Li; S. Ma; Y. Shi2023Meta-analysisEvaluates the effectiveness of gamification in education and identifies moderators41 studies, 49 samples, >5071 participants; random-effects model with moderatorsLarge overall effect on learning outcomes; significant moderators include user type, discipline, duration, environment, and design principlesSupports a configurable application and experimental tuning of mechanics to context [2]9F. F.-H. Nah et al.2013Chapter / conferenceConceptual framework for gamified learning through computer gamesLiterature-based conceptual frameworkProposes a structure connecting principles, design elements, and engagement measuresProvides a vocabulary of mechanics and metrics for formalizing application requirements [14]10H. Qureshi; S. Khatoon2023ArticleCompares the impact of several gamified tools on reading comprehensionMixed methods: survey n=200 and interviews n=10Reports positive perceptions and practices; calls for more research on long-term effects and best implementation strategiesSupports multi-mode design and the need for clear implementation and evaluation protocols [24]11N. F. Razali et al.2020Conference paper (open)Examines the effects of quiz-application elements on intrinsic and extrinsic motivationNon-experimental design; n=63; regression analysis; CC BY licenseSpecific elements such as points, difficulty, and avatar are significantly associated with extrinsic motivationUseful for selecting and parameterizing mechanics and for later A/B tests in the application [25]12L. Rodrigues et al.2022Article (open)Longitudinal test of novelty and familiarization effectsSemester-long longitudinal analysis with a control comparisonGamification effects change over time; long-term measurement and control comparison are necessarySupports built-in analytics for monitoring effect dynamics and sustainability [18]13H. Sitompul et al.2023Article (open)Examines students' perceptions of Quizizz in higher education and related barriersMixed methods: survey and focus groups; n=272Reports higher engagement, autonomy, and self-control; also identifies barriers and need for varied strategiesUseful for UX requirements, teacher onboarding, and low-threshold implementation design [23]14R. Smiderle et al.2020Article (open)Examines gamification effects in relation to personality traitsFour-month experiment; n=40; gamified versus non-gamified comparisonEffects vary by personality traits; one design does not fit all learnersJustifies personalization of UX, social mechanics, and motivational profiles [19]15J. Zeng et al.2024Meta-analysisAssesses the impact of gamification on academic performance22 experimental studies (2008-2023), random-effects modelModerately positive effect on academic achievement (Hedges's g˜0.782); moderators are importantSupports evaluation of hard outcomes and context-sensitive mechanic selection [4]16T. Kabudi; I. Pappas; D. H. Olsen2021Systematic mapping (open)Maps the literature on AI-enabled adaptive learning systems and methods147 studies (2014-2020); identifies intervention types and analytical methodsAI systems adapt content to individual needs, but fully implemented systems remain relatively limited; stronger problem-solution matching is neededForms the basis for the AI module: learner model, recommendations, and adaptive interventions [5]17D. Chiotaki et al.2023Systematic review (open)Reviews approaches to adaptive game-based learningPRISMA-based review of studies from 2010 to 2022Shows the importance of performance and engagement signals; adaptation often remains limited to finite content setsDirectly informs adaptive logic design and clarifies the limits of pseudo-personalization [6]18W. Min et al.2019/2020Article (open copy available)Deep learning-based stealth assessment from gameplay tracesCompares LSTM and FFNN models with baseline methods on data from about 182 studentsLSTM-based approaches improve accuracy and early prediction while reducing manual feature engineering; interpretability remains a challengeProvides a basis for stealth assessment and for explainability requirements in the application [29]19R. I. Maxim; J. Arnedo-Moreno2025Article (open)User-centered framework for the design of digital educational gamesDesign science research; 10-step EDTF; expert validationHighlights the lack of user-centered design and proposes a co-design and iterative research frameworkProvides the methodological basis for UX research and development in the diploma project [8]20UNESCO (F. Miao; W. Holmes)2023Report / guide (open)Global guidance on generative AI in educationPolicy and normative document; human-centered approachIdentifies regulatory gaps, privacy risks, and the need for age-sensitive governance and validationDefines non-functional requirements: privacy, age-sensitive modes, human-in-the-loop, and ethical validation [9]
Brief Annotations of the Five Added Open-Access Sources (Nos. 16-20)
[16] Kabudi et al. (2021). This systematic mapping study shows which types of AI interventions are used in adaptive learning systems and which analytical methods dominate the field. It also emphasizes that the number of fully implemented solutions remains relatively small and that better matching is needed between the educational problem and the adaptive mechanism. This source is important for designing the AI core of the application as a set of concrete functions - diagnosis, recommendations, and adaptive task delivery - each tied to a specific pedagogical problem. [5]
[17] Chiotaki et al. (2023). This systematic review of adaptive game-based learning distinguishes between content adaptation and experience adaptation and shows that the use of performance and engagement data during the intervention is a central adaptive mechanism. At the same time, it notes that personalization is often restricted to pre-authored sets of materials. For the diploma project, the source provides criteria for judging adaptation quality and highlights the limits of shallow branching. [6]
[18] Min et al. (2019/2020). This article presents DEEPSTEALTH, a deep neural approach to stealth assessment that analyzes sequences of gameplay actions in order to infer competence. The framework improves predictive accuracy and enables earlier diagnosis compared with baseline approaches, while also reducing the amount of manual feature engineering required. At the same time, the authors show that interpretability and explainability remain essential if such assessment is to be educationally trustworthy. [29]
[19] Maxim and Arnedo-Moreno (2025). This study identifies the lack of strong user-centered design in digital educational games and proposes the 10-step EDTF framework, grounded in HCI logic and supported through expert validation. It offers a direct methodological basis for the UX part of the diploma project, including user research, prototyping, and usability and usefulness testing. [8]
[20] UNESCO (2023). The international guidance on generative AI in education is centered on a human-centered approach and emphasizes risks related to weak regulation, data privacy, and institutions' limited readiness to validate AI tools responsibly. For the diploma application, the document provides a clear rationale for privacy-by-design and ethics-by-design requirements. [9]
References (20 sources; 15 original + 5 added)
Format note: DOI and URL entries are given as clickable identifiers. Source titles remain in their original English bibliographic form.
Agustin Aibar-Almazan et al. (2024). Gamification in the classroom: Kahoot! as a tool for university teaching innovation. Frontiers in Psychology, 15. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1370084
Yigal Attali; Meirav Arieli-Attali. (2015). Gamification in assessment: Do points affect test performance? Computers & Education, 83, 57-63. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.12.012
Huseyin Bicen; Selcuk Kocakoyun. (2018). Perceptions of Students for Gamification Approach: Kahoot as a Case Study. International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 13(02), 72-93. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v13i02.7467
Christo Dichev; Darina Dicheva. (2017). Gamifying education: what is known, what is believed and what remains uncertain. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 14, 9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-017-0042-5
Wendy Hsin-Yuan Huang; Dilip Soman. (2013). A Practitioner's Guide to Gamification of Education. Rotman School of Management, University of Toronto. URL: https://inside.rotman.utoronto.ca/behaviouraleconomicsinaction/files/2013/09/GuideGamificationEducationDec2013.pdf
Daniel A. Kaufmann. (2018). Reflection: Benefits of gamification in online higher education. Journal of Instructional Research, 7, 125-132. ERIC: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1188367
Liuyufeng Li; K. F. Hew; J. Du. (2024). Gamification enhances student intrinsic motivation, perceptions of autonomy and relatedness, but minimal impact on competency: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Educational Technology Research and Development, 72(2), 765-796. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-023-10337-7
Minzi Li; S. Ma; Y. Shi. (2023). Examining the effectiveness of gamification as a tool promoting teaching and learning in educational settings: a meta-analysis. Frontiers in Psychology, 14. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1253549
Fiona Fui-Hoon Nah et al. (2013). Gamification of education using computer games. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39226-9_12
Hiba Qureshi; Sahib Khatoon. (2023). The impact of gamification tools on reading comprehension skills: A comparative study of Kahoot!, Quizizz, and Baamboozle for English language learners. Pakistan Languages and Humanities Review, 7(IV), 181-195. DOI: https://doi.org/10.47205/plhr.2023(7-iv)16
Nadia Fitrah Razali et al. (2020). Gamification elements in Quizizz applications: Evaluating the impact on intrinsic and extrinsic students' motivation. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 917(1), 012024. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/917/1/012024
Luiz Rodrigues et al. (2022). Gamification suffers from the novelty effect but benefits from the familiarization effect: Findings from a longitudinal study. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-021-00314-6
Harun Sitompul et al. (2023). Exploring students' perception of Quizizz as a learning media in higher education. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 49(3). DOI: https://doi.org/10.21432/cjlt28449
Rodrigo Smiderle et al. (2020). The impact of gamification on students' learning, engagement and behavior based on their personality traits. Smart Learning Environments. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-019-0098-x
Jiyuan Zeng et al. (2024). Exploring the impact of gamification on students' academic performance: A comprehensive meta-analysis of studies from the year 2008 to 2023. British Journal of Educational Technology, 55(6), 2478-2502. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13471
Added open-access sources (5):
Tumaini Kabudi; I. Pappas; D. H. Olsen. (2021). AI-enabled adaptive learning systems: A systematic mapping of the literature. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence, 2, 100017. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2021.100017
Domna Chiotaki et al. (2023). Adaptive game-based learning in education: a systematic review. Frontiers in Computer Science, 5. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2023.1062350
Wookhee Min et al. (2019/2020). DeepStealth: Game-Based Learning Stealth Assessment With Deep Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, 13(2), 312-325. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2019.2922356 (open copy available)
Raluca Ionela Maxim; Joan Arnedo-Moreno. (2025). EDTF: A User-Centered Approach to Digital Educational Games Design and Development. Information, 16(9), 794. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/info16090794
UNESCO (Fengchun Miao; Wayne Holmes). (2023). Guidance for generative AI in education and research. URL: https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/guidance-generative-ai-education-and-research


