
APPROVED
Educational and methodological council
LLP "Astana IT University"
Protocol No. 5 of January 25, 2023

      Appendix to the internal regulatory document "Guidelines for the implementation of diploma projects/works at Astana IT University LLP" dated November 28, 2019.
Table 1.1 - Criteria for evaluating projects in the Software Engineering educational program

Estimated parameterGradeRationale for the Assessment1. Introduction15 pointsProvide an overview of the project or research topic (5 points).
Explain the significance of the work and its potential impact (5 points).
Outline the objectives and goals of the project (5 points).
2. Literature Review:15 points
Availability of a high-quality literature review (15 points):
More than 20 scientific citations (5points).
15 to 20 scientific citations (5 points).
From 10 to 15 scientific citations (3 points).
Less than 10 scientific citations (1 points).3. Analysis of Existing Systems/Conceptual framework 10 pointsEvaluate current systems or solutions related to your project. (2 points).
Identify strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. (2 points).
Discuss how your project improves upon or differs from existing systems (2 points).
Describe the methods and sources used to collect data for your project. (2 points).
Discuss any challenges or limitations in obtaining relevant data (2 points).
4. Methodology/Methods/Approach of the Work15 pointsExplain the approach or methodology used to carry out the project. (5 points)
Detail the steps involved in data analysis, experimentation, or development. (5 points)
Justify your chosen methodology and explain how it aligns with your project goals. (5 points)
5. MVP/UML Diagrams/Architecture of the Project15 points






Present Minimum Viable Product (MVP) features or functionalities. (5 points)
Use UML diagrams (e.g., use case diagrams, sequence diagrams, class diagrams) to illustrate the system architecture and design. (5 points)
Provide explanations and annotations for each diagram to clarify the system's structure and behavior. (5) points)6. Technology comparison /Technology used 10 points



Compare different technologies, frameworks, or tools relevant to your project. (2 points)
Evaluate their suitability based on criteria such as performance, scalability, ease of use, etc. (2 points)
Discuss the rationale behind your technology choices. (6 points)
      7. Effective Implementation /Deployment of the Project20 pointsCreate visual representations of the project's user interface or system components. Backend is connected with frontend and database (10 points)
Showcase different screens, layouts, and interactions. (5 points)
Explain the design choices and how they enhance user experience or system functionality. (5 points)
8. Presentation and Communication /Quality of writing expression 10 pointsThe way of student to present the project and related work (3).
Communication of the student during the presentation and explaining the facts (3). 
The Quality of writing the project report (4)The maximum points that can be awarded for each criterion are indicated.
TOTAL 100 points
Director of Computer Engineering 						Praveen Kumar 
